# recA_analysis
Bioinformatic analysis of the bacterial gene recA to understand the role it plays in the evolution of antibiotic resistance

# Background
When exposed to stress (e.g., antibiotics), bacteria trigger their “SOS pathway,” in which a series of DNA polymerases, Pol II, Pol IV, and Pol V, are activated.  These polymerases raise the mutation rate from a baseline level of 9.0x10-10 to 1.8x10-5 [1], thus generating genetic diversity necessary for a population to survive in the face of strong selective pressure.  

The mutagenic polymerases are under the control recA [2]. recA is also required for horizontal gene transfer (HGT) [3]. HGT allows genetic innovations to spread through a population rapidly and is believed to be a primary driver for the spread of MDR bacterial strains [1]. Thus, recA is a promising target for adjuvant therapies that prevent bacterial evolution and acquired resistance. 

This project uses bioinformatics tools to explore features the recA evolutionary process in E. coli and evaluate its feasibility as a drug target.

# Part One: dN/dS evolutionary analysis
This segment explores data from Richard Lenski's Longer Term Evolution Experiment. which has been propogating the same strain of bacterial for over 60,000 generations [9].  We hypothesize that RecA is more highly conserved compared to the remainder of the genome because it is essential for evolution. Thus, recA will have fewer non-synonymous mutations (lower Dn/Ds ratio) compared to the remainder of the genome. 

dN/dS is the ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous mutations. dN/dS is an accepted metric to determine which genes are most (or least) conserved [9]. For each strain, the Dn/Ds ratio will be calculated for recA and the remainder of the genome. At a high level, the steps are as follows: 

1. Align the strains against the ancestral strain (REL606), which serves as the reference strain [10, 11]. Determine the mutations by comparing the strains to the reference strains using breqseq [12]. Then, calculate the dN/dS ratio based on the mutations. 

2. Evaluate if the difference between the dN/dS ratio for recA and the remainder of the genome is statistically significant [13]. 


# Part Two: RNA-seq analysis
This segment of the project explores a recent data set generated by subjecting E. coli to 17 different antibiotics at sub-lethal concentrations for 25 minutes until OD ~0.2, and then performing RNA-seq [4].  This data is found on NCBI under accession number GSE110137.  We will use these data to perform the following steps:

1. Align the RNA reads to a reference sequence using the industry standard nextflow RNA-seq pipeline [5]. Note: first iteration aligned to the EB1 reference genome.  Future iterations will assemble the true reference genome from the actual strain of bacteria used in the study, BW25113, which is found under accession number CP009273 [6].  

2. Generate a network subgraph centered around recA and mutagenic polymerases.  We plan to use the differential expression matrix created in step 1 and we expect these genes to be highly expressed during the stress caused by antibiotics.  We will follow the proceedure detailed by Cabusora [7].  A similar approach for building a recA subgraph was employed in Mycobacterium tuberculosis [8]. 

3. Simulate a directed network attack against recA to evaluate recA as a therapeutic target.

# Running the code
For step 2.1, the workflow is run entirely using the nextflow RNA-seq pipeline with a docker profile from the command line, using the command listed in the file "RNA_seq_bash_commands".

To successfully implement this part of the pipeline, users first need to download an RNA-seq sample in FASTQ format.  This requires installing SRA tools from NCBI (https://github.com/ncbi/sra-tools).  These files are too large to be stored in this repo, but can be retreived using the bash command listed in the ./code directory on this repo.  

Next, these files are fed into the nextflow RNA-seq data pipeline, which performs sequence aligment using STAR and generates data QC reports at various stages of data processing.  This again requires setting up nextflow RNA-seq per the instructions at https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq.  Once nextflow is set up with a docker profile, the pipeline can be run using the bash command listed in the ./code directory on this repo.  


# References
1. Perron G.G., Lee A.E.G., Wang Y., Huang W.E., and Barraclough T.G. “Bacterial recombination promotes the evolution of multi-drug-resistance in functionally diverse populations”.  Proc. R. Soc. B (2012) 279, 1477–1484 doi:10.1098/rspb.2011.1933
2. Roca A.I. and Cox M.M.  “RecA Protein: Structure, Function, and Role in Recombinational DNA Repair.”  Progress in Nucleic Acid Research and Molecular Biology, Vol. 56, 129-223 (1997).
3. Chen Z., Yang H.,  & Pavletich N.P.  “Mechanism of homologous recombination from the RecA–ssDNA/dsDNA structures.” Nature, Vol 453, 22 May 2008.  doi:10.1038/nature06971
4. Zoffmann S, Vercruysse M, Benmansour F, et al. Machine learning-powered antibiotics phenotypic drug discovery. Sci Rep. 2019;9(1):5013. Published 2019 Mar 21. doi:10.1038/s41598-019-39387-9
5. Ewels PA, Peltzer A, Fillinger S, Alneberg JA, Patel H, Wilm A, Garcia MU, Di Tommaso P, Nahnsen S. nf-core: Community curated bioinformatics pipelines. bioRxiv. 2019. p. 610741. doi: 10.1101/610741 
6. Grenier F, Matteau D, Baby V, Rodrigue S. Complete Genome Sequence of Escherichia coli BW25113. Genome Announc. 2014;2(5):e01038-14. Published 2014 Oct 16. doi:10.1128/genomeA.01038-14
7. Lawrence Cabusora, Electra Sutton, Andy Fulmer, Christian V. Forst, Differential network expression during drug and stress response, Bioinformatics, Volume 21, Issue 12, , Pages 2898–2905, https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bti440
8. Nicole Radde, Jutta Gebert, Christian V. Forst, Systematic component selection for gene-network refinement, Bioinformatics, Volume 22, Issue 21, 1 November 2006, Pages 2674–2680, https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btl440
9. http://myxo.css.msu.edu/ecoli/genomicsdat.html
10. Barrick, J., et al. “Genome evolution and adaptation in a long-term experiment with Escherichia coli.” Nature, Vol 461, 29 October 2008. Doi: 10.1038/nature08480.
11. Gouzy, J. and Salanoubat, M. “Genome sequence of the plant pathogen Ralstonia solanacearum” Nature, Vol 415, 31 January 2002. Doi: 10.1038/415497a
12. https://barricklab.org/twiki/bin/view/Lab/ToolsBacterialGenomeResequencing

